>> So, let's go to
the second step.
What's the second
step in this process?
>> It's almost one of the most
important things that you can
do.
And this is your gut bacteria.
So your gut bacteria are
responsible for making
your brain chemicals.
So this is the factory
of your brain chemicals.
And, actually, the
factory of your entire
body for all of the protein.
So all of the repair
of your muscles,
and your tissue,
all of your hormones
are all manufactured in the gut.
So to do this, you
have certain bacteria
that do the manufacturing.
And then you've got
certain bacteria
that you can be carrying
that you don't require,
but can cause depression for
themselves, in their own right.
So one of the most common ones
a lot of people hear about,
but they can sometimes think
it's a bad one, but it's not,
is e coli.
So e coli is responsible
for producing folate.
And folate it is necessary
for every brain chemical.
Folate is also necessary
for the production
of tryptophan, and
tyrosine, and phenylalanine.
And all of these are
amino acids or proteins.
And all of these proteins are
necessary for the production
of every brain chemical.
So if you have any
problem with your e coli,
if you don't have
enough e coli, you
can't make your own
brain chemicals.
And this is when people are
reliant on anti-depressants,
or they're reliant
on supplements
with those nutrients in
them to feel good every day.
The key is to correct the gut.
And then you can take
them off the things
that they're using to
support themselves and get
their body making the
brain chemicals themselves,
because you should
be able to do that
at any time in someone's life,
if you can get that balance
right.
So e coli is one component.
But one of the biggest
problems, and I'm
finding these in 90% of my
patients with depression,
is there's a range of bacteria
that produce D-lactic acid.
The D-lactic acid
is a nerve toxin.
When you eat carbohydrates,
these bacteria
convert the carbons
from the carbohydrates
into D-lactic acid.
And that D-lactic acid amplifies
every emotion you have.
So if you have a
little bit of anxiety,
maybe from a food allergen,
or maybe because you've
got stress in your
life, or you're
just nervous about
something, but if you're
carrying these bacteria as well,
all of a sudden, that anxiety
feels 1,000 times stronger.
Or if you've got a
little bit of sadness,
that sadness feels
like severe depression.
So depending on the level
of infection that you have--
and you can pick
up these infections
anytime in your life.
If you travel to
third world countries,
we pick it up from other humans.
So you drink the tap water,
you get Bali belly, we call it,
or diarrhea,
vomiting, a cold, flu.
Anything like that at
any time in your life,
and you could have picked
up a huge dose, or even
a little dose of these bacteria.
And gradually, over the
years, these bacteria
will grow and multiply.
The more they grow, then the
more carbohydrates you eat.
And carbohydrates
are not the enemy.
So we need to know that
limiting carbohydrates
is great for some
things, but if you
need to do it long term to
control bacteria, that's
not the answer.
The answer is
controlling the bacteria,
so that you can have those
carbs without offending you.
So sometimes we might eat
breakfast with carbs or lunch
with carbs.
And we have a reaction to that.
And we wonder, well, obviously,
I can't handle carbs.
But that might not be the case.
Might not be an allergy to the
carbs, which we might assume.
But it can be
because the bacteria
is turning that
carb into an acid
and immediately amplifying
every emotion we have.
>> Wow, how profound.
How interesting.
So when we talk about bacteria
and the gut-brain connection,
I mean, we sort of
skipped over that.
But that's a bit of a big news.
I mean, the gut and the brain
are connected, because for me,
it when I originally got into
this, helping my dad recover
from depression and anxiety,
that research was coming out,
and it was a big deal.
I mean, when you first
start looking into it,
you think, well, everything
would originate in the brain.
And the brain would be the
origin of these issues.
So let's fix the brain.
But now, it's all about the gut.
Tell me a little bit about that.
>> When I test people, the
amount of times that I do this
testing and we're able to see
that the brain is actually not
being affected at all, yet
they're getting all of these
symptoms.
Well, it's being affected.
But it's a symptom
of another problem.
So we see that the brain
has no imbalances showing,
yet they've got all
of these symptoms.
And oftentimes, depression,
or the depressive symptoms
and the anxiety
symptoms, are coming
from an overload of
lactic acid, instead of
from a drop in
serotonin or dopamine.
It might not even be biochemical
in brain neurotransmitters.
It might be completely caused
by too much acid in the brain,
or not enough
oxygen to the brain.
All of those things will have
an impact on how you feel,
without actually altering
the brain chemicals.
So if you are then
given antidepressants
to treat the problems,
and you don't
respond to antidepressants,
It's a good indicator
to say that this isn't
even coming from the brain.
We really need to
look somewhere else.
>> And it's mostly
from the gut, you say.
>> Yeah, mostly from the gut.
So as I said, 90% of the
patients that I found,
over 2,000 stool tests that
I had done for my patients
over the years,
and I decided I was
going to go through and
count them up, and find out
what the percentage was.
And out of the ratio
shift, so you're
supposed to have almost none
of the D-lactic acid producing
bacteria.
You can get away with none, and
your gut will be very healthy.
And you're supposed to
have 70% to 90% of e coli,
because it's making all
the brain chemicals.
But what I find is
that the ratio changes.
And we end up with 80% to 90%
of the D-lactic acid producing
bacteria.
And the e coli is
suppressed, because it
has to fight for its
space in the gut.
And it can't compete anymore.
Because these bacteria
produce so much acid,
it doesn't allow the
other bacteria to survive.
So your lactobacillus
and your bifidobacterium,
the good bacteria that
help you digest your food
and keep your immune
system strong,
they also suppress in the
presence of the acid producing
bacteria.
And then people's
immune system drops.
And then they're able
to pick up more viruses.
And they're getting
chronic fatigue syndrome.
And their allergies
develop further,
because they're
not able to digest
the food that they're eating.
So having that
bacterial imbalance
can lead to more allergies,
where having allergies
doesn't necessarily
lead to bacteria.
Bacteria you have to catch it.
You have to be
exposed to it somehow
to be able to pick it up.
But a lot of my patients are
teachers working with children,
and kids not
washing their hands.
Also a large percentage
of my patients
are nurses and even janitors
who work in the hospitals.
So they're exposed
to environments
where they're having to
look after other people.
And the contact is through stool
and caring for someone else.
So those are the types
of people that you see.
So sanitization, and
washing your hands,
and being very careful
in public toilets.
That's really important
to keep this at bay.
>> And how do you normally
test for the bacteria
in somebody's gut?
>> You can do stool tests.
They're available.
So there's a few
different pathology labs
who do different stool tests.
And most health practitioners
know how to access those.
So it's just about
getting a test that
will show you all
of the bacteria
that you're currently carrying,
and have a look at the ratios
that you're carrying.
So it's you can almost Google
D-lactic acid producing
bacteria and see a whole
range of them on the internet,
and learn about their
presence, and whether you're
carrying those ones or not.
It's the L-lactic acid
producing bacteria that we want.
OK, so L-lactic acid,
we make, or the bacteria
that's healthy for us.
We have an enzyme in our body
that breaks down L-lactic acid.
So L-lactic acid
helps us with thought,
emotions, cognitive function.
So when we're producing
our L-lactic, acid
and we're producing our
emotions, we can control that.
Because once it's
used, our enzyme
gets rid of the L-lactic acid.
When a bacteria is
living in your gut,
producing endless amounts
of D-lactic acid--
D-lactic acid and
L-lactic acid are
mirror images of each other.
They fit into the same
receptor sites in your brain.
So the D-lactic
acid then amplifies
every emotion you
have, because it can do
the same as the L-lactic acid.
Except we have no
enzyme to get rid of it,
so it becomes uncontrolled.
So this is why a little bit of
nervousness, all of a sudden,
feels so profound that
you can't breathe.
And you can't control that.
And you wonder why.
And you think, nothing happened.
Why is it that I
feel so stressed?
I don't understand why I'm
feeling as strongly as I am,
severe anger, severe
behavioral problems, you
see it in children
or adults where
they can't control that anger.
And it's just that
amplification of emotion.
It's coming from the gut.
>> And so how do we
go about healing that?
If you discover that you're
high in D-lactic acid,
or you might anticipate
that you are, is it foods?
Is it supplements?
Is it a combination of both?
Is it traditional
cultured foods?
I mean, we hear a lot
about that, at the moment,
like kefirs, and kombuchas,
or sauerkrauts, or kimchis.
I mean, what's your approach
to healing the gut bacteria?
>> Those foods are fantastic in
helping to keep the environment
right.
Though, we're supposed to
colonize our good bacteria
through breastfeeding
and through bacteria
that come through
our mother, which
are human strain probiotics.
So humans strain
probiotics are the type
that colonize the gut,
where vegetable version
probiotics, which
are very beneficial,
they don't colonize the gut.
They are transient.
So they move through.
So if you're using them on a
daily basis, that's fantastic.
It will help with
that environment.
But what we want to do is
colonize good bacteria,
so that they're permanent, so
that you get that ecosystem
right.
When it comes to picking
up an infection that
is D-lactic acid, such as
streptococcus, staphylococcus,
enterococcus, these are all
D-lactic acid bacterium,
very common.
A lot of people have heard
of strep throat or staph
infections on the skin.
School sores, impetigo, that's
what they're commonly called.
When you're carrying
those in your gut,
they will keep multiplying
and multiplying.
And you can't really alter them
too much by changing something
in your diet.
What you really need
to do is be using
different types of antibiotic
herbs, garlic in your diet,
and different things like that.
If you've got a very, very
strong infection, such as one
strong enough to be causing
depression and anxiety,
you can use herbal antibiotics.
But you really need to be able
to suppress those bacteria,
and do something about them,
rather than just controlling it
with your diet.
You can make it worse by
eating foods that fuel them,
such as carbohydrates,
as I mentioned before,
which is what directly
converts into the acid.
But if you can control
that, you don't
want to have to rely
on a diet permanently
to try and keep your
symptoms at bay.
You want to actually get the
bacteria right, permanently,
so that if you do change
your diet, occasionally,
it doesn't end up
giving you symptoms
of depression or anxiety.
>> So when we talk about
the colonization of the gut,
you mentioned breastfeeding
or breast milk,
and also I think I'd anticipate
you talking about the birth
process, coming through
the vaginal canal,
the initial inoculation
through the mouth into the gut.
But how does somebody
colonize themselves later,
like at our age or
if they're older?
I mean, they can't go and
rebirth or take any breast milk
again.
I mean, how do we
recolonize our gut?
Does supplementation do that,
or is that also transient?
No, no, there are some
amazing companies out there,
the research companies, the
natural therapies companies,
that are testing up to thousands
of different probiotics,
the lactobacillus and the
bifidobacterium ranges.
And there are hundreds of
subtypes of all of those.
And they're testing
them for quality,
and for endurance, and being
able to get through stomach
acid, and being able
to survive heat,
and all those types of things.
And when they work out
those levels of probiotics
that are strong enough to get
through all of those systems
that we need to get through,
then they produce those.
And we can use that
in probiotic form.
So if you do use probiotics--
I don't believe that you need
to take probiotics for life.
I think that once you've
colonized a good level of them,
you can use the food
sources, fermented foods,
to keep your gut flora right.
So as I said, you can
keep those transit ones
happening all the time.
And they will help prevent
you from picking up
infections of the D-lactic
acid producing bacteria.
But if you do happen to
have missed that somehow,
and have picked up a bacteria
that's changed the ecosystem,
then you really need to go
through a correction phase
to be able to get that right.
>> Like a colonization phase.
>> Colonization, so reducing the
ones that are causing you harm,
and colonizing the ones
that need to be colonized.
So that, eventually, you
can change the ratio again.
And that, for some people, can
take as little as three months.
Some people, on average,
around about six months.
But I have seen some
patients-- generally,
people become symptomatic
with these symptoms
once they're carrying
at least a million
of the bacteria in their gut.
But I've seen some patients
at 20 to 200 million
of these D-lactic acid
producing bacteria.
And they're quite depressed.
Then, I've seen some
patients carrying up
to 300 million bacteria.
And for those, they're not
even tolerating sounds,
electrical environments.
So they can feel everything,
because it's a nerve toxin.
So their nervous system is
so awake and alive that they
can hear things that
are bothering them.
The smells are intensified.
So fuel, the smell
of fuel, really
causes them quite
severe symptoms.
And those emotions are
just through the roof.
>> And so when they go through,
say, someone with that level,
or someone with
a moderate level,
they'll go through a
process, like you said,
of a few weeks or a few
months of re-colonizing
or re-inoculating the
gut through probiotics.
So that'll be high doses of
probiotics for that period?
>> I don't tend
to use high doses.
I tend to just use the
minimum dose of the probiotic.
That will take its
time to colonize,
as long as you keep doing
that during the period.
>> Consistently.
The most important
part is suppressing
those other bacteria.
They can be quite resistant,
can take quite a while to treat.
>> And you suppress that with
the antibiotic herbs or with
the probiotics?
>> No, with the
antibiotic herbs.
>> OK so the first
step is the allergies.
So doing the tests, or
keeping the food dairy,
removing the allergies.
And the second step
is the bacteria.
So ideally, having
the stool test,
and then using the
antibiotic herbs
to suppress the bad bacteria.
And using the
probiotics to recolonize
with the good bacteria
over a period of time.
And then taking the fermented
foods as a supportive process,
once you've done that that's.
Great, OK.